---
layout: page
description: a project with a background image
img: assets/img/12.jpg
importance: 1
category: tutorial
title: "Stream Reasoning: From Theory to Practice"
date: "2020-06-23"
---

### Abstract

Stream Reasoning is set at the confluence of Artificial Intelligence and Stream Processing with the ambition goal to reason on rapidly changing flows of information. The goals of the lecture are threefold: 1) introducing students to Stream Reasoning state-of-the-art, 2) deep diving into RDF Stream Processing by outlining how to design, develop and deploy a stream reasoning application, and 3) discussing together the limits of the state-of-the-art and understand the current challenges.

## Organizers

##### Emanuele Della Valle

Emanuele Della Valle is an associate professor at Politecnico di Milano. He holds a PhD in Computer Science from the Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam and a Master degree in Computer Science and Engineering from Politecnico di Milano. He is an assistant professor at the Department of Electronics, Information and Bioengineering of Politecnico di Milano. In 20 years of research, his research interests covered Big Data, Stream Processing, Semantic technologies, Data Science, Web Information Retrieval, and Service Oriented Architectures. He started the Stream Reasoning research field positioning it at the intersection between Stream Processing and Artificial Intelligence. His work on Stream Reasoning was applied in analysing Social Media, Mobile Telecom and IoT data streams in collaboration with Telecom Italia, IBM, Siemens, Oracle, Indra, and Statoil. With the experience he gained, he started two companies to create data-centric products and services. He co-authored 22 journal articles, 33 conference papers in major conferences, 3 books, and more than 70 other manuscripts including minor conferences, book chapters, workshop papers and posters. He is a member of the editorial board of Journal of Web Semantics.

##### Emanuele Falzone

Emanuele Falzone is a Ph.D. student at Politecnico di Milano, at Department of Electronics, Computer and Bioengineering, under the supervision of Prof. Emanuele Della Valle, since November 2019. His research interest is mainly Stream Processing. He received his M.Sc. degree in Computer Science from Politecnico di Milano in December 2018. He graduated in B.Sc. in Computer Engineering from Politecnico di Milano in September 2016.

##### Riccardo Tommasini

Riccardo Tommasini is an assistant professor at the University of Tartu, Estonia. Riccardo did his PhD at the Department of Electronics, Information and Bioengineering of Politecnico di Milano. His thesis, titled "Velocity on the Web", investigates the velocity aspects that concern the variety of information that populates the Web environment. His research interests span Stream Processing, Knowledge Graphs, Logics, and Programming Languages. Riccardo's tutorial activities comprise Stream Reasoning Tutorials at ISWC 2017, ICWE 2018, ESWC 2019, and TheWebConf 2019, and DEBS 2019.

## Program

#### Part 1: What is Stream Reasoning?

- Who Are We
- Stream Reasoning
    - Vision
    - Research Question
        
        - stream processing vs stream reasoning: the intuition
        
        - qui anche Eventi
- Semantic Technologies 101:
    - RDF
    - SPARQL 1.1
    - RDFS/OWL 2
- Continuous Processing
    - Windows

#### Part 2: RDF Stream Processing and Reasoning

- RDF Stream Processing
    - Extending SPARQL for Streams
        - Windows (again)
        - Existing Dialects
    - RSP-QL
        - syntax and semantics
        - SDS and Time-Varying Graphs
    - Demo: Cooking Green Boxing from the Color Streams
    - Exercise
        - Invent a Query
        - Write it using RSP-QL
- RDF Stream Reasoning
    - Reactiveness vs expressiveness
    - Ontology Streams
    - RSP-QL and Reasoning
    - Demo: Cool and Warm color

#### Part 3: Publication and Conclusion

- Streaming Linked Data
    
    - Lifecycle
    
    - Resource
        - TripleWave
        - VoCaLS
    
    - Examples of real-world streams
        - GDELT, DBPedia Live, Wikimedia Events

- Conclusion
    - 10 years later!
    - What comes next? Inductive Stream Reasoning

## The Linear Pizza Oven Challenge

More info will soon appear here!

#### Support

Join the StreamReasoning Slack #RWChallenge Channel

[https://streamreasoningslack.herokuapp.com/](https://streamreasoningslack.herokuapp.com/)

## Demos

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xl2KBxkOulo&list=PLQ3msfQykXVlxGogS6tSUh4sUAFZjJKTJ
