---
layout: page
description: a project with a background image
importance: 1
category: workshop
title: "Stream Reasoning Workshop 2018"
date: "2018-01-16"
---


# Stream Reasoning Workshop 2018

The Stream Reasoning Workshop will take place from January 16th to 17th, 2018.

Additionally, a co-located hackaton will be held on January 15th (more on it below this page).

## Organisation

 * Daniele Dell'Aglio (University of Zurich)
 * Thomas Eiter (TU Vienna)
 * Fredrik Heintz (Linköping University)
 * Danh Le Phuoc (TU Berlin)

## Aim and scope

Processing, querying and reasoning over streaming data is studied in different communities such as KR&R, Semantic Web, Databases, Stream Processing, Complex Event Processing, etc., where researchers have different perspectives and face different challenges.

This workshop aims at advancing Stream Reasoning as research theme by bringing together these different views and goals. In addition to invited talks, the workshop will provide opportunities for all participants to engage in discussions on open problems and future directions.

Participation is by invitation only. Registration is free of charge and includes attendance to all workshop events and lectures, coffee breaks, and lunches.

## Date and venue

The workshop will be held on January 16-17, 2018

The workshop will be held at the Department of Informatics of the University of Zurich, located in Binzmühlestrasse 14, CH-8050 Zürich. Information about how to reach it are available at: [http://www.ifi.uzh.ch/en/department/about/contact.html](http://www.ifi.uzh.ch/en/department/about/contact.html)

The event will be held in room 2.A.01. The easiest way to reach it is the following: enter the building, take the lift on the left and go to the second floor. When you exit, go straight towards the door with an A label (i.e. the A wing). At the end of the hallway, turn right and the room 2.A.01 is on the left.


## Program and schedule

### Tuesday 16.01

#### Morning session 1: 09:00 - 10:30

 * Welcome and introduction
 * Keynote 1: Martin Strohbach: _Understanding Complex Physical Environments In Real time – IoT Applications in Sports, Entertainment, and Industry 4.0_
 * Pavel Smirnov: _The HOBBIT platform. Benchmarking of distributed linked data streaming systems_

#### Morning break: 10:30 - 11.00
#### Morning session 2: 11:00 - 12:30

 * Patrick Koopmann: Semantic Stream Reasoning with Metric Temporal Description Logics and Interval-Rigid Names
 * Pieter Bonte: _Cascading Reasoning with Streaming MASSIF_
 * David Bowden: _Data Characterisation at the Edge_
 * Eva Blomqvist: _Stream reasoning use cases and challenges in criminal intelligence analysis and e-health_
 * Jonas Traub: _Optimized On-Demand Data Streaming from Sensor Nodes_
 * Riccardo Tommasini: _RSPLab: RDF Stream processing Benchmarking made easy_
 * Morning session wrap-up

#### Lunch: 13:00 - 14.00
#### Afternoon session 1: 14:00 - 15:00

 * Keynote 2: Michael Zakharyaschev: _Ontology-based data access for event monitoring and diagnostics_
 * Stefan Ellmauthaler

#### Afternoon break: 15:15 - 15:45
#### Afternoon session 2: 15:45 - 17:30

 * Alessandro Ronca: _Stream Reasoning in Temporal Datalog_
 * Daniel de Leng: _Stream Reasoning with Incomplete Information_
 * Nikos Katzouris: _Online Relational Learning from Datastreams_
 * Vladislav Ryzhikov: _Ontology-Based Data Access with Metric Temporal logic: Experimental Evaluation_
 * Markus Brenner: _Incremental Reasoning for Large Amounts of Data_
 * Wrap up and discussion

#### Social event: 19:30

The social event will be held at Pizzeria Scala Zurich. Information about how to reach the place will be given on the morning.

### Wednesday 17.01
#### Morning session 1: 09:00 - 10:30

 * Keynote 3: David Basin: Monitoring MFOTL
 * Dmitriy Traytel: Almost Event-Rate Independent Monitoring of Metric Regular Properties
 * Thu Le Pham: Enhancing the Scalability of Expressive Stream Reasoning via input-driven Parallelisation

#### Morning break: 10:30 - 11.00
#### Morning session 2: 11:00 - 13:00

 * Avi Bernstein: _Fraud Detection with Signal/Collect — A Case Study_
 * Özgür L. Özçep: _Axiomatizations of stream operators_
 * Jean-Paul Calbimonte: _Stream reasoning agents_
 * Keynote 4: Jeff Z. Pan: _Stream Reasoning for Test Driven Knowledge Graph Construction_

#### Lunch: 13:00 - 14.00
#### Afternoon session 1: 14:00 - 15:00

 * Ruben Taelman: _Version Reasoning: Stream Reasoning’s lost cousin_
 * Konstantin Schekotihin
 * Patrik Schneider
 * Akansha Bhardwaj: _Event-Based Stream Reasoning_

#### Afternoon break: 15:00 - 15:30
#### Afternoon session 2: 15:30 - 17:00

 * Hackaton report
 * Wrap-up and conclusions

## Hackaton (15.01)
### Motivation

With stream reasoning, we associate a wide set of different methods and techniques. As we observed in the Stream Reasoning workshops 2015 and 2016, this heterogeneity is evident from the large variety of tasks, problems and situations presented, where the main common element are streams and the idea of adopting reasoning operations over them.

In this context, the need for finding a common ground how to compare and contrast methods and techniques has emerged. The goal of the stream reasoning hackathon is to take a step in this direction. The main purpose of the event is to sketch some exciting and challenging problems to be used as foundations for the creation of a Stream Reasoning competition, inspired by similar initiatives in other communities (e.g. ASP, SAT and ICAPS). The goal is to find scenarios/application profiles and define data sets (composed of streaming and contextual data) and tasks related to these data sets (e.g. queries and reasoning tasks) based on these application profiles.

The day will be structure as follows:

### Morning session

 * presentations of relevant existing resources - quick presentations of datasets, benchmarks, scenarios and existing challenges
 * brainstorming session to collect a set of requirements
 * identification of n scenarios/application profiles to be studied in the afternoon session

### Afternoon session

 * participants will be split into n groups
 * each group will work on a scenario/application profile, trying to define the requirements and define relevant data sets and tasks related to the application profile
 * plenary session with group presentations and discussions

Finally, during the workshop, each group will have the opportunity to present its results. Workshop participants will give feedback, and at the end of the event, we will announce the winning resource. Such a resource will be the basis for the Stream Reasoning challenge, which will be held at the Stream Reasoning workshop 2019.

## Notes
This page was created for archival reasons. The original page was published at: [https://www.ifi.uzh.ch/en/ddis/events/streamreasoning2018.html](https://www.ifi.uzh.ch/en/ddis/events/streamreasoning2018.html). 